feat(jest-mock): add `mock.whenCalledWith(...)` (#16053)
jestjs/jest: docs/MockFunctionAPI.md

Configures a return value or implementation that only fires when the mock is called with arguments matching `...args`. Useful when a single mock needs to behave differently for different argument lists without branching logic inside `mockImplementation`.

```js
const fn = jest.fn();
fn.whenCalledWith('apple').mockReturnValue('red');
fn.whenCalledWith('banana').mockReturnValue('yellow');

fn('apple'); // 'red'
fn('banana'); // 'yellow'
fn('grape'); // undefined
```

The returned object is a real `Mock`, so anything you can chain on a regular `jest.fn()` chains here too: `mockReturnValue`, `mockReturnValueOnce`, `mockResolvedValue`, `mockResolvedValueOnce`, `mockRejectedValue`, `mockRejectedValueOnce`, `mockImplementation`, `mockImplementationOnce`. Each matched call routes to that sub-mock; non-matching calls fall through to the base mock.

#### Matching

Each `args` slot accepts a literal or any [asymmetric matcher](ExpectAPI.md#expectanyconstructor):

```js
fn.whenCalledWith(expect.any(Number)).mockReturnValue('numeric');
fn.whenCalledWith({user: expect.any(String)}).mockReturnValue('user');

fn(42); // 'numeric'
fn({user: 'alice'}); // 'user'
```

> Argument matching uses `equals` from `@jest/expect-utils` with `iterableEquality`, so structural equality, Map/Set discrimination, and asymmetric matchers all behave as you'd expect from [`toHaveBeenCalledWith()`](ExpectAPI.md#tohavebeencalledwitharg1-arg2-). Custom testers registered via `expect.extend(...)` are **not currently** applied to `whenCalledWith` matching — if that's a gap for your use case, please open an issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structural equality, Map/Set discrimination, and asymmetric matchers all behave as you'd expect from [`toHaveBeenCalledWith()`](ExpectAPI.md#tohavebeencalledwitharg1-arg2-). Custom testers registered via `expect.extend(...)` are **not currently** applied to `whenCalledWith` matching — if that's a gap for your use case, please open an issue.
```
seems a bit much implementation detail

#### Onces and persistents

`mockReturnValueOnce` queues a one-shot value on the matched branch; `mockReturnValue` sets the persistent fallback. Once values drain in registration order, then the persistent fires:

```js
fn.whenCalledWith('x')
  .mockReturnValueOnce('A')
  .mockReturnValueOnce('B')
  .mockReturnValue('persistent');

fn('x'); // 'A'
fn('x'); // 'B'
fn('x'); // 'persistent'
fn('x'); // 'persistent'
```

Async variants work identically:

```js
const fetchUser = jest.fn();
fetchUser.whenCalledWith(1).mockResolvedValue({id: 1});
fetchUser.whenCalledWith(2).mockRejectedValue(new Error('not found'));
```

#### Repeat calls return fresh branches

Each `whenCalledWith(...)` call returns a brand-new sub-mock, even when the matchers look the same. Calls with overlapping matchers are resolved by the [precedence rules](#precedence) — the most recently registered "persistent" wins for matching calls, and queued "onces" drain in registration order across all matching branches:

> ```js

Reviewer: This example would be more helpful if it actually showed the exact behavior not just explained in comments but by also queueing a once on the second branch, and a persistent on the first branch

Author: let me know if this code example is what you were talking about

fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValueOnce('A');
fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValue('B');

fn('x'); // 'A' (once on first branch)
fn('x'); // 'B' (last-registered persistent)
fn('x'); // 'B'
```

> If you want to add behavior to an existing registration, save the reference and chain on it:

Reviewer: Since our behavior now always checks across all branches, I'm not sure there's a use case where you'd have to do this, so we can probably leave this section out now for simplicity

Reviewer: Esp. if we adjust above example as in my other comment, so that it already covers the branches concept better

```js
const branch = fn.whenCalledWith('x');
branch.mockReturnValueOnce('once');
branch.mockReturnValue('default');
```

#### Fall-through

When a matched branch is exhausted (queued onces consumed and no persistent set) the call falls through to the base mock — it does **not** silently return `undefined`:

```js
fn.mockReturnValue('default');
fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValueOnce('once');

fn('x'); // 'once'
fn('x'); // 'default' (matched branch drained, falls through)
fn('y'); // 'default' (no matcher fires)
```

#### Precedence

When multiple registrations could match a single call, they're resolved in this order:

| Priority | Source |
| --- | --- |

> | 1 | Parent-level `*Once` queue (`fn.mockReturnValueOnce`, `fn.mockImplementationOnce`, etc.) — the most explicit one-shot override, fires regardless of matchers |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1 | Base `*Once` queue (`fn.mockReturnValueOnce`, `fn.mockImplementationOnce`, etc.) — the most explicit one-shot override, fires regardless of matching branches |
```
consistency

> | 2 | Earliest matching branch with a queued `*Once` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2 | Earliest-registered matching branch with a queued `*Once` |
```
consistency with the one below

| 3 | Last-registered matching branch with a persistent impl |

> | 4 | Base impl set on the parent (`fn.mockReturnValue`, the `spyOn` original method, etc.) — or `undefined` if none |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 4 | Implementation set on the base (`fn.mockReturnValue`, the `spyOn` original method, etc.) — or `undefined` if none |
```
consistency

```js
const fn = jest.fn();
fn.whenCalledWith('apple').mockReturnValue('red');
fn.whenCalledWith('banana').mockReturnValue('yellow');

fn('apple'); // 'red'
fn('banana'); // 'yellow'
fn('grape'); // undefined
```

The returned object is a real `Mock`, so anything you can chain on a regular `jest.fn()` chains here too: `mockReturnValue`, `mockReturnValueOnce`, `mockResolvedValue`, `mockResolvedValueOnce`, `mockRejectedValue`, `mockRejectedValueOnce`, `mockImplementation`, `mockImplementationOnce`. Each matched call routes to that sub-mock; non-matching calls fall through to the base mock.

#### Matching

Each `args` slot accepts a literal or any [asymmetric matcher](ExpectAPI.md#expectanyconstructor):

```js
fn.whenCalledWith(expect.any(Number)).mockReturnValue('numeric');
fn.whenCalledWith({user: expect.any(String)}).mockReturnValue('user');

fn(42); // 'numeric'
fn({user: 'alice'}); // 'user'
```

Argument matching uses the same equality as [`toHaveBeenCalledWith()`](ExpectAPI.md#tohavebeencalledwitharg1-arg2-):

> - **Arity** — `whenCalledWith('a')` matches `fn('a')` and `fn('a', undefined)`, but **not** `fn('a', 'b')` or `fn()`. (Trailing `undefined` is allowed for parity with Jest's existing call-tracking semantics.)

Author: Yeah agreed, the wording was overpromising. Rewrote to be honest about what we actually use (`equals` + `iterableEquality`) and added a note that `expect.extend(...)` user testers don't apply.

- **Deep equality** — objects and arrays are compared structurally.

#### Multiple matchers

Distinct matchers route independently:

```js
const fn = jest.fn();
fn.whenCalledWith('a').mockReturnValue(1);
fn.whenCalledWith('b').mockReturnValue(2);
fn.whenCalledWith('c').mockReturnValue(3);

fn('a'); // 1
fn('b'); // 2
fn('c'); // 3
fn('z'); // undefined
```

> Two registrations whose matchers _overlap_ on a given call (e.g. `expect.objectContaining({a: 1})` and `expect.objectContaining({b: 2})` against `fn({a: 1, b: 2})`) both match. The dispatcher resolves them via the precedence rules below.

Reviewer: "dispatcher" is internal terminology that doesn't belong in here

Author: Done, dropped from user-facing docs everywhere. Kept it in the PR description's reviewer-facing section, but the actual docs are clean now.

fn('x'); // 'B'
```

If you want to add behavior to an existing registration, save the reference and chain on it:

```js
const branch = fn.whenCalledWith('x');
branch.mockReturnValueOnce('once');
branch.mockReturnValue('default');
```

#### Fall-through

When a matched branch is exhausted (queued onces consumed and no persistent set) the call falls through to the base mock — it does **not** silently return `undefined`:

```js
fn.mockReturnValue('default');
fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValueOnce('once');

fn('x'); // 'once'
fn('x'); // 'default' (matched branch drained, falls through)
fn('y'); // 'default' (no matcher fires)
```

#### Precedence

When multiple registrations could match a single call, the dispatcher resolves them in this order:

| Priority | Source |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | Parent-level `*Once` queue (`fn.mockReturnValueOnce`, `fn.mockImplementationOnce`, etc.) — the most explicit one-shot override, fires regardless of matchers |
| 2 | Earliest matching branch with a queued `*Once` |
| 3 | Last-registered matching branch with a persistent impl |
| 4 | Base impl set on the parent (`fn.mockReturnValue`, the `spyOn` original method, etc.) — or `undefined` if none |

> #### Composition

Reviewer: Would split into separate headings "On spies", "Resetting". The constructor behavior I'm not sure is worth mentioning. It doesn't seem specific to `whenCalledWith`?

Author: Ok can split and drop the constructor bit.

Works with [`jest.spyOn()`](JestObjectAPI.md#jestspyonobject-methodname). Non-matching calls fall through to the spied object's original method:

```js
const target = {greet: name => `hello ${name}`};
const spy = jest.spyOn(target, 'greet');
spy.whenCalledWith('world').mockReturnValue('hi world');

target.greet('world'); // 'hi world'
target.greet('jest'); // 'hello jest' (original method)
```

Works with `new` (constructor mocks). `new fn(args)` matches the same way as `fn(args)`:

```js
const Service = jest.fn();
Service.whenCalledWith('cfg').mockImplementation(() => ({connected: true}));

const s = new Service('cfg'); // {connected: true}
```

`mockReset()` on the parent clears all `whenCalledWith` registrations and cascades the reset to each sub-mock — so any references you kept reflect the reset state. Calling `mockReset()` on a sub-mock clears only that branch.

#### TypeScript

> `whenCalledWith` accepts the same matcher tuple as `toHaveBeenCalledWith` — each parameter slot is constrained by the mock's parameter type, but also accepts an asymmetric matcher in that slot. Chained `mockReturnValue`/`mockResolvedValue` are constrained by the mock's return type:

Reviewer: Are we able to narrow based on overloads? I.e. for
```
function x(a: string): string;
function x(a: number): number;
function x(a: string|number): string|number { return a }
```
can we forbid `jest.fn<typeof x>().whenCalledWith('a').mockReturnValue(1)`?

Author: the TS seems extra tricky here, happy to keep researching if you think it's possible or if the 15 deep ternary is probably fine.

From Claude:

> What he wants is overload-pair narrowing: when you whenCalledWith('a'), TypeScript should "remember" that the matching overload was (a: string) => string, so the
>   chained .mockReturnValue(1) would error because the return type for that overload is string, not number.
> 
>   The current types do generate a union across all overloads (up to 15), so any return type from any overload is allowed once you've matched any arg-set. This is the
>    part that's loose.
> 
>   Why this is hard: TypeScript has no native "given these args, infer the matching overload" mechanism. The standard trick is a conditional type ladder:
> 
>   type PickOverloadReturn<F, Args> =
>     F extends { (...a: Args): infer R; ... }
>       ? R
>       : F extends { (...a: any): any; (...a: Args): infer R; ... }
>         ? R
>         : ...
> 
>   This kind of works for 2-3 overloads but blows up for 15. It also fails subtly when overloads have overlapping signatures (e.g., (a: string) => string and (a:
>   string | number) => string | number).
> 
>   My recommendation: defer. Open a follow-up issue, get user feedback on whether it's actually a pain in practice. Adding it now is high risk for a feature that's
>   mostly about runtime behavior. The current loose union types still catch the common errors (string-arg with number-arg, etc.), just not the cross-overload-pair
>   ones.
> 
>   Reasonable, or do you want me to try to land a working overload-narrowing helper for jeysal in this PR?
> 
> ※ recap: Working through PR #16053 review feedback for `whenCalledWith` in jest-mock; currently in /grill-me mode mapping out the work. Next: you decide whether to
>   attempt overload narrowing for jeysal or defer it.
> 
> ❯ so is there no looping way to do it instead of a 15 deep ternary?
> 
> ⏺ Real answer: no clean loop exists. TypeScript represents overloads as an intersection of call signatures, and there's no native way to iterate that intersection —
>   keyof, mapped types, and distributive conditionals don't work over it.
> 
>   The popular libraries (type-fest, ts-toolbelt, our own FunctionParameters) all use the manual 1...N ladder for exactly this reason. There's a known trick where you
>    can "peel off" overloads one at a time by checking progressively more-specific conditional patterns, but each level needs its own hand-written conditional — you
>   can't recurse arbitrarily because each level's pattern has a different shape, and TS can't generate them.
> 
>   A few partial workarounds:
> 
>   1. Shorter ladder. Drop from 15 to ~5 — covers the realistic case (most functions don't have 15 overloads). Trade-off: silent failure for functions with 6+. Could
>   mention it in a comment.
>   2. Once we have the overload list, picking the matching one for given args is another hand-written conditional — extends [string] vs extends [number] etc. Even
>   more brittle. This is the bit that makes "actually narrow the return type per overload pair" especially expensive.
>   3. Punt the narrowing to the chain. Don't try to remember the overload through .whenCalledWith().mockReturnValue(). Instead, just constrain whenCalledWith's args
>   to one of the overload tuples (already done) and let mockReturnValue accept the union of all overload returns (current state). Document it as a known limitation.
> 
>   My honest take: the juice isn't worth the squeeze here. We'd be writing maybe 100 lines of type-level code that works for ≤5 overloads and silently fails for more,
>    to catch errors that the runtime would catch on the first test run. Defer with a comment ack'ing jeysal's question and an issue link.
> 
>   Want me to defer, or take a swing at a 3-5-overload version anyway?

```js tab
test('different return values per arg list', () => {
  const fn = jest.fn();
  fn.mockReturnValue('default');
  fn.whenCalledWith('apple').mockReturnValue('red');
  fn.whenCalledWith('banana').mockReturnValue('yellow');

  expect(fn('apple')).toBe('red');
  expect(fn('banana')).toBe('yellow');
  expect(fn('grape')).toBe('default');
});
```

```ts tab
import {expect, jest, test} from '@jest/globals';

test('different return values per arg list', () => {
  const fn = jest.fn<(fruit: string) => string>();
  fn.mockReturnValue('default');
  fn.whenCalledWith('apple').mockReturnValue('red');
  fn.whenCalledWith('banana').mockReturnValue('yellow');

  expect(fn('apple')).toBe('red');
  expect(fn('banana')).toBe('yellow');
  expect(fn('grape')).toBe('default');
});
```

Asymmetric matchers and `mockReturnValueOnce` work as you'd expect:

```js
test('matchers + once', () => {
  const fn = jest.fn();
  fn.whenCalledWith(expect.any(Number))
    .mockReturnValueOnce('first')
    .mockReturnValue('rest');

  expect(fn(1)).toBe('first');
  expect(fn(2)).toBe('rest');
  expect(fn(3)).toBe('rest');
});
```

> Repeat registrations on the same matchers update the existing branch rather than shadowing it, so the order of `mockReturnValueOnce` and `mockReturnValue` does not matter:

Reviewer: What do we want
```
fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValue('A');
fn.whenCalledWith(expect.any(String)).mockReturnValueOnce('B');
```
to behave like? Not the "same" matcher, but both matching.

The only intuitive behavior I can think of would be to check all available matching branches to exhaust Once impls first, otherwise we'd vary based on order again.

Author: So your specific example already works, as those two matcher will merge, but it got me thinking about other possible use cases such as two matchers that "overlap" but do not "merge". Like this one:
```ts
fn.whenCalledWith(expect.objectContaining({a: 1})).mockReturnValue('persistent');
fn.whenCalledWith(expect.objectContaining({b: 2})).mockReturnValueOnce('once');

fn({ a: 1, b: 2 }) // what should happen?
```

I think that all matching Once mocks should execute in a first-in sequence as they are "queued" and then non-once are executed in a last-in sequence. 

I was able to get this to work, and I prefer to have it this way, but it needed a total refactor. I was no longer able to use the closure-chaining approach, need to use a dispatcher + registry pattern.

```js
test('once-then-persistent regardless of declaration order', () => {
  const fn = jest.fn();
  fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValueOnce('A');
  fn.whenCalledWith('x').mockReturnValue('B');

  expect(fn('x')).toBe('A');
  expect(fn('x')).toBe('B');
});
```

Once a matched branch's queued behavior is exhausted (for example, after a `*Once` is consumed) the call falls through to the base mock instead of returning `undefined`.

> `whenCalledWith` works on spies created with [`jest.spyOn()`](JestObjectAPI.md#jestspyonobject-methodname), in which case non-matching calls fall through to the original method. `mockReset()` on the parent clears every `whenCalledWith` registration; calling it on a sub-mock returned by `whenCalledWith(...)` clears only that branch.

Reviewer: Nit: Looks like first half is about spies and second much more general, should split into two paragraphs

Author: Fixed

> Precedence note: `whenCalledWith` and the base mock's implementation follow last-registered-wins semantics. Register the base mock first, then layer `whenCalledWith` overrides on top.

Reviewer: Not sure this says anything that wasn't already clarified before / in examples.

Author: Fixed
